Add web integration document (#100)
tc39/proposal-async-context: WEB-INTEGRATION.md

These APIs always invoke the callback to run user code as part of an
asynchronous operation that they start, and which affects the behavior of the
operation. Since the background async operation is started by the API that takes
the callback, the registration and causal contexts are the same.

This context also matches the way these APIs could be implemented in JS:
```js
async function api(callback) {
  await doSomething();
  await callback();
  await doSomethingElse();
}
```

- [`Document`](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#document):
  [`startViewTransition()`](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-view-transitions-2/#dom-document-startviewtransition)
  method [\[CSS-VIEW-TRANSITIONS-1\]](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-view-transitions-1/)
- [`LockManager`](https://w3c.github.io/web-locks/#lockmanager):
  [`request()`](https://w3c.github.io/web-locks/#dom-lockmanager-request) method
  [\[WEB-LOCKS\]](https://w3c.github.io/web-locks/)

### Action registrations

These APIs register a callback or constructor to be invoked when some action
runs. They’re also commonly used as a way to associate a newly created class
instance with some action, such as in worklets or with custom elements.

> In cases where the action originates with the browser, or with a user event,
> then there is no dispatch context. Therefore, the only available context is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases where the action originates due to something happening outside of the web page (such as some user action), there is no dispatch context. Therefore, the only available context is the
```

> TODO: Discuss the details after figuring out events.
>
> - `controller.enqueue` inside a `.run()`
> 
>    ```js
>    const readable = new ReadableStream({
>      pull(controller) {
>        asyncVar.run(() => {
>          controller.enqueue(42);
>        });
>      }
>    });
>    const writable = new WritableStream({
>      write() {
>        console.log(asyncVar.get());
>      }
>    });
>    readable.pipeTo(writable);
>    ```
>
> - Transferring streams. Would there be a causal context?

### Observers

Observers are a kind of web API pattern where the constructor for a class takes
a callback, the instance’s `observe()` method is called to register things that
should be observed, and then the callback is called when those observations have
been made.

Unlike FinalizationRegistry, which works similarly, observer callbacks are not
called once per observation. Instead, multiple observations can be batched into
one single call. This means that there is not always a single causal context
that can be used; rather, there might be many.

Given this, for consistency it would be preferable to instead use the
registration context; that is, the context in which the class is constructed.

> - [`MutationObserver`](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#mutationobserver)

Reviewer: As a possible data point, this is already how `console.trace` builds its stack inside MutationObserver, both in Chrome and Firefox.

  [\[HTML\]](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/)
- [`setInterval()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/timers-and-user-prompts.html#dom-setinterval)
  [\[HTML\]](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/)
- [`queueMicrotask()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/timers-and-user-prompts.html#dom-queuemicrotask)
  [\[HTML\]](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/)
- [`requestAnimationFrame()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/imagebitmap-and-animations.html#dom-animationframeprovider-requestanimationframe)
  [\[HTML\]](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/)
- [`requestIdleCallback()`](https://w3c.github.io/requestidlecallback/#dom-window-requestidlecallback)
  [\[REQUESTIDLECALLBACK\]](https://w3c.github.io/requestidlecallback/)
- [`scheduler.postTask()`](https://wicg.github.io/scheduling-apis/#dom-scheduler-posttask)
  [\[SCHEDULING-APIS\]](https://wicg.github.io/scheduling-apis/)
- [`HTMLVideoElement`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/media.html#htmlvideoelement):
  [`requestVideoFrameCallback()`](https://wicg.github.io/video-rvfc/#dom-htmlvideoelement-requestvideoframecallback)
  method [\[VIDEO-RVFC\]](https://wicg.github.io/video-rvfc/)

> ### Async completion callbacks

Reviewer 2: Node.js may choose either way--it can decide for itself whether it feels that the alignment with web or ALS is more important for them. I think it'd be good for someone to work on a separate design document for this, but I don't think it's a Stage 2.7-blocker the same way as web integration is.

> ### Async completion callbacks

Author: Although this document is specifically about the web integration, because that is a requirement for stage 2.7, I think it should also apply to runtime-specific APIs. Otherwise, that would create an inconsistency in Node.js, since it will have to follow the web API behavior for the web APIs it implements.

I haven't looked at Node.js's APIs in any detail, but if you're talking specifically about async completion callbacks, I don't see how there would be any other possible context for them other than the registration callback. The API (let's say `fs.readFile()`, for a concrete example) would start an async operation in the background, and the data flow of that operation would go back to the call to `fs.readFile()`. I don't think there is any other relevant context here, but @Qard can correct me.

> ### Async completion callbacks

Reviewer 2: I still think Node.js can make this tradeoff for themselves, even as I acknowledge the inconsistency risk.

> ### Async completion callbacks

Reviewer 3: I think the idea was that `fs.readFile` might set some variables internally, and so there's a question of whether those changes would be reflected in the callback.  @Qard seemed to suggest that they should, but this is precisely what leads to the inconsistency between callbacks and promises.

> ### Async completion callbacks

Author: This is only observable if `fs.readFile` does in fact set variables internally. As far as I'm aware, this is not the case for any such APIs in Node.js. But you're right that a lot of this doesn't take runtime- (or webplatform-) -internal variables into consideration. And things like the WebIDL handling of callbacks is described as simply storing the snapshot and restoring it later, when the needs of `scheduler.yield` would mean more often than not it's a different snapshot that has to be stored.

> ### Async completion callbacks

Reviewer 4: Addressed in https://github.com/tc39/proposal-async-context/blob/master/CONTINUATION.md. This should be addressed with a new type of async variable that provides "flowing-out" semantics.

algorithm, but the callbacks might also run in response to some other web API,
which can have a different context. In those cases, the callbacks should still
run in the context in which the web API that started the algorithm was called.
However, it might also be useful in some cases to make the synchronous context
available to the callback, for example by passing an `AsyncContext.Snapshot` as
an additional argument. Some examples:

- The underlying [source](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/#underlying-source-api)
  / [sink](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/#underlying-sink-api) /
  [transform](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/#transformer-api) APIs for streams
  [\[STREAMS\]](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org). Other than the `start` method,
  which is always invoked synchronously when the stream is constructed, the
  other underlying API methods are invoked in response to operations on the
  stream. These operations might have a synchronous cause such as JS code
  calling `reader.read()`, or an asynchronous cause such as JS code calling
  `await new Response(stream).text()`, and it might be useful to provide the

>   context for such causes to the callback – for example, by adding an extra

Reviewer 5: When might it be useful in this way? I'm trying to anticipate how likely this future extension would be.

  `AsyncContext.Snapshot` argument to the methods. This might be left for later,
  rather than being part of the initial rollout.

> - [`NavigateEvent`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/nav-history-apis.html#navigateevent):

Reviewer 5: I'm not clear what the takeaway is for this item.

  method [\[WEBAUDIO\]](https://webaudio.github.io/web-audio-api/)
- [`PaintWorkletGlobalScope`](https://drafts.css-houdini.org/css-paint-api-1/#paintworkletglobalscope):
  [`registerPaint()`](https://drafts.css-houdini.org/css-paint-api-1/#dom-paintworkletglobalscope-registerpaint)
  method [\[CSS-PAINT-API\]](https://drafts.css-houdini.org/css-paint-api-1/)

In the case of custom elements, the actions that invoke the custom element
methods are usually triggered from JS code calling a web API, e.g. removing a
custom element with `el.remove()` will cause its `disconnectedCallback` method
to be run. But in some cases custom element reactions can also run as a response
to a user action, such as removing a custom element inside a text editing
context. To avoid having a difference between these cases, we propose using the
context in which the custom element was defined with
[`customElements.define()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/custom-elements.html#dom-customelementregistry-define)
[\[HTML\]](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/). In the future it might be
possible to add a way to get the snapshot in which el.remove() was invoked, if

> there are use cases.

Author: When discussing AsyncContext with @yoavweiss, he also mentioned that custom element reactions are a case where you'd want to go with call-time rather than registration-time. But it's not clear to me why this would be the case and whether it's unique to custom element reactions. And if WebIDL automatically takes care of storing and running the registration snapshot, it might not be easy spec-wise or implementation-wise to go with call-time.

The thing that convinced me that custom element reactions should use the registration snapshot, however, is the fact that they don't always have a call snapshot. If you have a custom element inside a `contentEditable` element, and you delete it when editing, there's no call context for the `disconnectedCallback` reaction. So that would break one of the design goals we set for the web integration, which was that the context in which a callback is called from a web API would not be either empty or non-empty depending on factors unrelated to the web API.

> there are use cases.

Reviewer 3: I discussed this with @rictic and he came to the same conclusions that registration snapshot would be basically useless for custom element lifecycle events.  In the case where there _is_ a workable programmatic causal snapshot, I think it needs to be the default in order to not break ~every use case for AsyncContext when used with custom elements.  We can discuss elsewhere whether the fallback should be a null/top-level snapshot, or else the registration snapshot.

> there are use cases.

Reviewer 6: Call-time semantics for custom elements give you the context that connected/disconnected the element, which is what you want (at least for Task Attribution in the context of soft navigations).

The same could be true for e.g. PerformanceObsrevers. E.g. for user timing, you'd want the context of the code that added a mark, rather than the generic RUM code that registered the handler.

> there are use cases.

Reviewer 6: ^^ @shaseley @mmocny

In the cases where the registration web API takes a constructor, the methods and
getters of the returned object (e.g. the `processor` method in web audio
worklets, or the `attributeChangedCallback` method of custom elements) also
count as callbacks that these APIs invoke, and which should preserve the

> relevant context.

Reviewer 5: This is somewhat related to the old issue https://github.com/whatwg/webidl/issues/701: the way in which these are specified today, by using raw JS machinery instead of a standardized Web IDL pattern, is annoying to get right and error-prone.

Certainly not a blocker, but if someone wanted to shave that yak while they were doing the web integration here, there would be much rejoicing.

snapshot when the callback is passed to a web API, and running the callback in
that snapshot.

However, for certain events, the dispatch context might be important for
authors. In those cases, we propose extending specific Event subclasses with a
property containing an `AsyncContext.Snapshot` object. In cases where there
might or might not be a dispatch snapshot (e.g. the `click` event, which would
have a dispatch snapshot if it originates from `el.click()` but not if it
originates from a user click), this property would be `null` if there isn’t one.
Note that the web platform can start out conservatively adding these properties
only for certain `Event` subclasses, and incrementally add support for more
later.

For `Event` subclasses in which this property is nullable, constructing them
from JavaScript should set that property to `null`. It might be possible to
extend the constructor’s options bag to allow capturing the snapshot at
construction time, but this would not be part of the initial rollout. For
subclasses where the property is not nullable, calling the constructor could
capture the snapshot. Another possibility is to always have this property as

> nullable, even for event types where there is always a dispatch context.

Reviewer 5: I would lean toward instead letting the developer set it to any snapshot value. The general pattern for event constructors is to let people set whatever they want for synthetic events.

### Dispatch snapshots for events created from JavaScript

> When an event is created from JavaScript, the `dispatchSnapshot` will be

Author: This was an editing mishap, I meant to delete this section and replace it with the last paragraph of the previous one.

An example of this is HTML media playback events, where if the user clicks play,
and in short succession JS code calls `videoEl.load()` and then `videoEl.play()`
in two different contexts, all three data flow branches will merge, resulting in
a single `load` event being fired.

If some of those sources are browser-originated and some originate from JS, only
the latter ones should be considered. Beyond that, each such individual event
would have to be considered. For media playback events, this merge is caused by
debouncing (i.e. if a load is already in progress, calling a method that would
start one will reuse the existing one), and so the dispatch context should be
that for the earliest web API call that resulted in this event. But other cases
might have other needs, and their specifics need to be considered.

## Runtime script errors

The `error` event on a window or worker global object is fired whenever a script
execution throws an uncaught exception. Having access to the context in which
the exception was thrown can help determine which of multiple independent
streams of execution triggered this error, and therefore how to clean up after

> it. Therefore,

Reviewer 5: A code example motivating this extra complexity would be helpful.

[`ErrorEvent`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#errorevent)
will have a `throwSnapshot` property, reflecting the context in which the

> exception was thrown.

Reviewer 4: I'd appreciate mentioning the alternative to capture the context where the error constructor was called, and allowing developers set any context snapshot appropriate for their cases.

## Promises / async web APIs

The `unhandledrejection` event on a window or worker global object is fired
whenever a promise resolves with a rejection, without having a rejection handler

> registered. Exposing the context in which the promise was rejected is useful for

Reviewer 2: Maybe the complexity here is an argument to go back to ALS's semantics of using Promise allocation time instead. I don't think we really identified use cases where the semantics matter one way or another, and as Andreu pointed out elsewhere, for platform-vended promises, the answer will be the same as if it were allocation time.

> registered. Exposing the context in which the promise was rejected is useful for

Reviewer 3: No, I also don't see cases where it would actually matter.  But I also still don't know what this document is actually saying - am I correct in understanding that the current text says it should be 2?

> registered. Exposing the context in which the promise was rejected is useful for

Reviewer 2: I *think* it would be 2, yes (in which case it does coincide!) because the rejection happens during the `Promise.resolve`.

the same reasons as for runtime script errors. Therefore,
[`PromiseRejectionEvent`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#promiserejectionevent)

> will have a `rejectionSnapshot` property reflecting this context.

Reviewer 5: Nit: `throw` is a verb and `rejection` is a noun. It seems better if they were aligned, probably on being a verb.

In the case of promises created by web APIs, it seems the rejection context
would always be the same as the context when the promise is created. According
to the categories in the [“Writing Promise-Using
Specifications”](https://w3ctag.github.io/promises-guide/) guide:
- For one-and-done operations, the rejection-time context of the returned
  promise should be the context when the web API that returns it was called.
- For one-time “events”, the promise is created at the same time as an async
  operation is started which will eventually resolve it, so the context would
  flow from creation to rejection. E.g, for the
  [`loaded`](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-font-loading-3/#dom-fontface-loaded)
  property of a [`FontFace`](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-font-loading-3/#fontface)
  instance, creating the `FontFace` instance causes both the promise creation

>   and the loading of the font.

Reviewer 5: This doesn't seem accurate. E.g. a stream could be created in one context, and then errored (which causes `ready` to reject) in another.

(including execution of classic scripts found during parsing) run with the
initial AsyncContext snapshot. The initial AsyncContext Snapshot will be
provided by the host environment (i.e. by the HTML spec, for the web), and it
should either be empty, or only have mappings from spec-defined
`AsyncContext.Variable`s (see “Using AsyncContext from web specs” below).

## Module evaluation

When you import a JS module multiple times, it will only be fetched and
evaluated once. Since module evaluation should not be racy (i.e. it should not
depend on the order of various imports), the context should be reset so that
module evaluation always runs with the initial AsyncContext snapshot. Inside of
`ShadowRealm`s, the AsyncContext snapshot for all module evaluations will be the
snapshot which was active when the `ShadowRealm` was created.

# Editorial aspects of AsyncContext integration in web specifications

An agent always has an associated AsyncContext mapping, in its
`[[AsyncContextMapping]]` field. When the agent is created, this mapping will be
set to an HTML-provided initial state, but JS user code can change it in a

> strictly scoped way.

Reviewer 5: I *think* I understand why this is agent-wide instead of global-wide, but extra explanation (e.g. of what would go wrong if it were global-wide) would be helpful.

The only way JS code can modify the current mapping is through
`AsyncContext.Variable` and `AsyncContext.Snapshot`’s `run()` methods, which
switch the context before calling a callback and switch it back after it
synchronously returns or throws. This ensures that for purely synchronous
execution, the context is automatically propagated along the data flow. It is
when tasks and microtasks are queued that web specs must manually track the data
flow.

The TC39 proposal spec text includes two abstract operations that web specs can
use to store and switch the context:
- [`AsyncContextSnapshot()`](https://tc39.es/proposal-async-context/#sec-asynccontextsnapshot)
  returns the current AsyncContext mapping.
- [`AsyncContextSwap(context)`](https://tc39.es/proposal-async-context/#sec-asynccontextswap)
  sets the current AsyncContext mapping to `context`, and returns the previous
  one. `context` must only be a value returned by one of these two operations.

> We propose adding a web spec algorithm “run the AsyncContext Snapshot”, that could be used like this:

Reviewer 5: This seems like it will be annoying for web spec authors to remember to use.

When would they need to use this, given that Web IDL promise and callback integration should take care of almost everything? E.g. in which of the above examples?

>    1. [AsyncContextSwap](https://tc39.es/proposal-async-context/#sec-asynccontextswap)(_previousContext_).
>    1. Throw _e_.
> 1. [AsyncContextSwap](https://tc39.es/proposal-async-context/#sec-asynccontextswap)(_previousContext_).

It might also be possible to integrate “run the AsyncContext Snapshot” together
with task queueing, since running an AsyncContext Snapshot inside a task will be
a very common operation.

Since the AsyncContext mapping is a property of the agent, these operations are
not available in parallel. However, web spec algorithms that run steps in
parallel before queuing a task that will run JS code must still track the data
flow along the parallel execution. However, in many cases this will mean
propagating the snapshotted context along with a callback through the parallel
algorithms, which will be handled automatically by WebIDL.

AsyncContext mappings also cannot be sent to a different agent. If the data flow
for some script execution or callback invocation originates from a different
agent, no context should be restored for that execution. In the case of an
event, the event would not have a dispatch context.

> ## Events

Reviewer 5: This section seems outdated in light of the above discussion about `dispatchSnapshot` no longer being a thing?

>       steps:
>       1. [Fire an event](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-event-fire)
>          named `foo`, with _**populateDispatchSnapshot**_ set to true, at
>          _target_.

## Runtime script errors

One important part of the way AsyncContext works is strict stacking – you can
only switch into a context by calling a function, which restores the previous
context when it returns or throws. This, however, would make exposing the throw
context in the error event impossible, since the spec text that calls into JS
would not have a way to get that throw context, if it is different from the
context that the spec text set for that JS execution.

To allow the error event to have the throw context,
[PR #95](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-async-context/pull/95) on the
AsyncContext proposal adds a `[[ThrowAsyncContextMapping]]` field on the agent
record. This field might still be set to `EMPTY` even when an exception was
thrown, but in those cases the throw context will be the same as the current
context.

The `error` event is fired through the
[“report an error”](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#report-the-error)

> and [“report an exception”](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#report-the-exception)

Reviewer 5: Note that these are getting consolidated and fixed in https://github.com/whatwg/html/pull/10404, and per the rest of the plan in https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/958#issuecomment-226309871 , further work will be done on Web IDL callback error catching.

spec algorithms [\[HTML\]](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/), which are
usually called immediately after a script execution or callback invocation.
Those algorithms will be updated to use `[[ThrowAsyncContextMapping]]` to get
the throw context, but in order to have the right context even when it is
`EMPTY`, they must be called before the call to `AsyncContextSwap()` that exits
the context in which the script is run:

> 1. Let _context_ be [AsyncContextSnapshot](https://tc39.es/proposal-async-context/#sec-asynccontextsnapshot)().
> 1. [Queue a global task](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#queue-a-global-task)
>    to run the following steps:

> >    1. Run the AsyncContext Snapshot _context_ while performing the following

Reviewer 5: Why is this necessary? Why can't Web IDL callback integration take care of this for web spec authors?

>       steps:
>       1. Perform some algorithm, which might call into JS. If this throws an
>          exception, catch it, and
>          [report the exception](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#report-the-exception).

## Promises

Since the rejection context of web spec-created promises seems to always be the
context in which the promises are created, it might be good to update WebIDL so
that [creating a new promise](https://webidl.spec.whatwg.org/#a-new-promise)
stores the current context, and restores it when

> [rejecting](https://webidl.spec.whatwg.org/#reject) it.

Reviewer 5: Not true per the above streams example.

But also not relevant, since we're not exposing the rejection context? Is this another leftover section?

  is called inside a task enqueued by
  [`scheduler.postTask()`](https://wicg.github.io/scheduling-apis/#dom-scheduler-posttask)
  [\[SCHEDULING-APIS\]](https://wicg.github.io/scheduling-apis/), its `priority`
  and `signal` arguments will be “inherited” from the call to `postTask`. This
  inheritance should propagate across awaits. See
  https://github.com/WICG/scheduling-apis/issues/94.

- **Future possibility: ambient `AbortSignal`**. This would allow using an
  `AbortSignal` without needing to pass it down across the call stack until the
  leaf async operations. See
  https://gist.github.com/littledan/47b4fe9cf9196abdcd53abee940e92df

- **Possible refactoring: backup incumbent realm**. The HTML spec infrastructure
  for the [incumbent realm](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#concept-incumbent-everything)
  uses a stack of backup incumbent realms synchronized with the JS execution
  stack, and explicitly propagates the incumbent realm through `await`s using JS
  host hooks. This might be refactored to build on top of AsyncContext, which
  might help fix some long-standing disagreements between certain browsers and
  the spec.

> Each of these use cases would need to define `AsyncContext.Variable` instances

Reviewer 5: Is this the right factoring? Or would it be better for there to be an abstract "async context variable record" or something that specs could use, without creating JS objects and dealing with all the associated fiddliness?

Reviewer 3: ISTR we discussed factoring it like you're suggesting.
